AI #2044: Update Editorial Notes section of Editorial Guidelines (#2111)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: guidelines/contributors/normative-requirements-guidelines.md

### Normative Subject

* Each normative requirement MUST clearly identify the subject being constrained.

#### Terminology Usage in Normative Requirements

> * Column references in normative requirements MUST use the ColumnId.
> * Display Names MUST NOT be used in normative requirements.
> * Display Names MAY be used in non-normative sections for readability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* References to FOCUS entities in normative requirements MUST use their canonical identifiers (e.g., `{DatasetId}`, `{ColumnId}`, `{AttributeId}`) or canonical object/property reference paths (e.g., `Object.Property[*].Field`).
* References to FOCUS entities in normative requirements MUST NOT use their Display Names.
```
### Reasoning:

#### Normative

- Generalize first to bullets cover all FOCUS entities (not just columns).

#### Non-normative

- Guidance on Display Names use in non-normative content should be addressed in the Editorial Guidelines
- Maybe something like this:

```markdown
* References to FOCUS entities in non-normative content (i.e., outside Requirements sections) MUST use Display Names when available.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm in support of all of this.

Author: Discussed with @ijurica and resolving this in favor of ### FOCUS Entity Reference Conventions.

  * a constraint on the resulting dataset state, or
  * a constraint on a schema-defined artifact.

### Tone and Grammar

In order to maintain a formal, professional tone throughout the specification, contractions MUST NOT be used in normative requirements (e.g., use "do not" instead of "don't").

### Use of BCP 14 Keywords

* Each normative bullet MUST contain exactly one of the following BCP 14 keywords: `MUST`, `MUST NOT`, `SHOULD`, `SHOULD NOT`, `MAY`.
* A bullet containing more than one normative keyword MUST be split (see [Splitting Requirements](#splitting-requirements) section).

> * The term `RECOMMENDED` MUST NOT be used as a normative keyword. The keyword `SHOULD` MUST be used instead.

Reviewer: Alternative:

```suggestion
* The following BCP 14 keywords MUST NOT be used: `REQUIRED`, `SHALL`, `SHALL NOT`, `RECOMMENDED`, `NOT RECOMMENDED`, `OPTIONAL`.
```

**Note:** Claude recommends Option A (explicitly prohibiting only `RECOMMENDED`) as the first bullet already limits usage to five allowed keywords ("exactly one of the following: MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MAY"), which implicitly excludes all others. Only `RECOMMENDED` needs an explicit prohibition because it was previously in active use and authors may default to it out of habit. Adding an explicit ban on keywords that were never used in the specification adds noise without practical value.

Reviewer 2: I think it's strange to disallow RECOMMENDED while not mentioning the other banned BCP words.  For the sake of anyone joining the group in the future, we should be clear about the full list.

I much prefer the alternative.

Author: Ok with me to disallow these extra BCP-14 keywords.

* contains more than one BCP 14 keyword,
* combines multiple obligations (e.g., multiple verifiable state descriptors, multiple objects, or multiple conditions that result in distinct constraints),

> * combines multiple independent conditions using “and” or “or” that result in distinct constraints

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* combines multiple independent conditions using “and” or “or” that result in distinct constraints,
```

Author: @ijurica, this is the statement that you will integrate its content with the line above.

Reviewer 2: Cool.  Resolving in favor of the other thread.

> 
> * contains more than one BCP 14 keyword,
> * combines multiple obligations (e.g., multiple verifiable state descriptors, multiple objects, or multiple conditions that result in distinct constraints),
> * combines multiple independent conditions using “and” or “or” that result in distinct constraints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* combines multiple verifiable state descriptors that result in multiple obligations (e.g., `ColumnA MUST be of type Decimal and conform to AttributeA requirements.`),
```

The initial proposal was to merge the two bullets into a single, broader rule. However, after further analysis , I believe the correct direction is not merging—but **simplifying**.

### Rationale

- **“Multiple verifiable state descriptors” is the only standalone case**  
  This captures scenarios where a single subject and BCP 14 keyword introduce multiple independently testable constraints (e.g., type + conformance). This case is not covered by any other rule and should be retained.

Before:
> * ColumnA MUST be of type Decimal and conform to AttributeA requirements.

After:
> * ColumnA MUST be of type Decimal.
> * ColumnA MUST conform to AttributeA requirements.

- **“Multiple objects” is not an independent trigger**  
  - With “and”: reduces to multiple verifiable state descriptors.  
  - With “or”: represents alternatives, and splitting would change semantics.  
  Therefore, this should not be listed as a separate case.

- **“Multiple conditions resulting in distinct constraints” is redundant**  
  All such cases fall into already covered categories:
  - multiple state descriptors,
  - multiple BCP 14 keywords, or
  - a single compound constraint (not splittable).  
  No clear example exists where this acts as a distinct trigger.

- **The second bullet (independent conditions with “and/or”) overlaps entirely**  
  It does not introduce a new splitting dimension and risks encouraging incorrect splits, particularly for “or” cases.

---

### Question

@jpradocueva, please let me know if you have an example that would not be covered by this proposal?

Reviewer 2: I'm in support!

Author: @ijurica, you have a nice example above:
e.g. "ColumnA MUST be of type Decimal and conform to AttributeA requirements" should be expressed as two separate requirements, "ColumnA MUST be of type Decimal" and "ColumnA MUST conform to AttributeA requirements." Is it possible to insert this example?

Author: @shawnalpay I discussed this with @ijurica, and we are planning to issue a separate PR with only examples. The goal is to add examples wherever needed rather than addressing a single topic.
